FOOTNOTE 1 Her speech is nothing
Page 105 - This is the first we hear about Ophelia’s grief. The immediate dismissal of her actions sets the tone for both the characters and the audience to interpret Ophelia’s grief. Her feminine portrayal of grief is not given the same respect by the characters as the more traditional actions by her grieving counterparts. She is immediately written off as insane before she has made it on stage.

FOOTNOTE 1 [distracted]
Page 105 - Stage directions tell readers that she is truly distracted. This differs from the description of Hamlet in 2.2, [reading on a book], where he is pretending to be crazy. This difference adds to the ongoing theme about sanity thus far in the novel. If someone acts crazy on purpose, how different is that from them actually being insane? This description also is relevant to perception of Ophelia in this scene overall. She is meant to be distracted, not raving, wild, or any other extreme depiction of insanity. Treating someone who is “distracted” as unsalvagably insane makes me question the character’s abilities to judge Ophelia.

FOOTNOTE 2 ⌜Song.⌝
Page 106 - Ophelia’s singing represents her madness while she communicates real ideas. This parallels what Toni Morrison did with Pilate in Song of Solomon. The use of singing to communicate their complex ideas makes both of these characters appear abnormal. Both characters are acting so far from the expected behavior that it draws both attention and skepticism from others nearby.

FOOTNOTE 2 At his head a grass-green turf,
Page 106 - Illustrative way to describe a buried person, in reference to Polonius. These lyrics come from an existing song of the era, not a new creation for this scene. Ophelia’s application of this song to her situation amplifies the strangeness of the situation. In her grief, she was not creating art to help depict her emotions, but applying them to existing songs of the time. She is grasping for the right thing to say that could help ease the pain, and instead of coming to her aid, the surrounding characters write her off as a lost cause.

FOOTNOTE 2 At his heels a stone.
Page 106 - Illustrative way to describe a buried person, in reference to Polonius. These lyrics come from an existing song of the era, not a new creation for this scene. Ophelia’s application of this song to her situation amplifies the strangeness of the situation. In her grief, she was not creating art to help depict her emotions, but applying them to existing songs of the time. She is grasping for the right thing to say that could help ease the pain, and instead of coming to her aid, the surrounding characters write her off as a lost cause.

FOOTNOTE 2 Larded all with sweet flowers
Page 106 - Ophelia’s first mention of flowers in this scene is in reference to her father. She holds a unique obsession with flowers throughout this scene, and they further distinguish her journey through grief from that of Laertes. She is concerned with the beauty of her father’s burial, similar to how she later on attempts to use flowers to aid herself and Laertes. Her methods of coping with loss are centered around beauty and joy. She isn’t concerned with revenge, and attempts to make her own situation better instead.

FOOTNOTE 3 Let in the maid, that out a maid
Page 107 - Ophelia’s song is of a woman losing her virginity while the man who took it chooses to deceive her instead of offering support. By singing about a man’s betrayal, she alludes to her feelings of confusion and betrayal from Hamlet, potentially showing that she suspects the truth about how Polonius died. Regardless of what she knows or suspects, her feelings of despair over the loss of her father, clearly are mixed in with the idea that she was betrayed. Her grief goes beyond just losing a parent. She simultaneously lost her father and lover while dealing with the true but unconfirmed possibility that Hamlet was responsible for both.

FOOTNOTE 3 Never departed more.
Page 107 - Ophelia’s song is of a woman losing her virginity while the man who took it chooses to deceive her instead of offering support. By singing about a man’s betrayal, she alludes to her feelings of confusion and betrayal from Hamlet, potentially showing that she suspects the truth about how Polonius died. Regardless of what she knows or suspects, her feelings of despair over the loss of her father, clearly are mixed in with the idea that she was betrayed. Her grief goes beyond just losing a parent. She simultaneously lost her father and lover while dealing with the true but unconfirmed possibility that Hamlet was responsible for both.

FOOTNOTE 3 Before you tumbled me,
Page 107 - Ophelia’s song is of a woman losing her virginity while the man who took it chooses to deceive her instead of offering support. By singing about a man’s betrayal, she alludes to her feelings of confusion and betrayal from Hamlet, potentially showing that she suspects the truth about how Polonius died. Regardless of what she knows or suspects, her feelings of despair over the loss of her father, clearly are mixed in with the idea that she was betrayed. Her grief goes beyond just losing a parent. She simultaneously lost her father and lover while dealing with the true but unconfirmed possibility that Hamlet was responsible for both.

FOOTNOTE 3 You promised me to wed.
Page 107 - Ophelia’s song is of a woman losing her virginity while the man who took it chooses to deceive her instead of offering support. By singing about a man’s betrayal, she alludes to her feelings of confusion and betrayal from Hamlet, potentially showing that she suspects the truth about how Polonius died. Regardless of what she knows or suspects, her feelings of despair over the loss of her father, clearly are mixed in with the idea that she was betrayed. Her grief goes beyond just losing a parent. She simultaneously lost her father and lover while dealing with the true but unconfirmed possibility that Hamlet was responsible for both.

FOOTNOTE 3 Conceit
Page 107 - intransitive. To form a conception of something; to think, conceive, imagine. Frequently with of, on, or parenthetically (with or without as)(OED). Claudius is applying Ophelia’s ramblings to the loss of her father. In doing this, allows other characters to pity her, which they do instead of trying to help. They view her as a lost cause because she is crafting fantasies about her father.

FOOTNOTE 4 Good night, ladies, good night, sweet ladies, good
Page 108 - Repetition of this phrase further depicts Ophelia’s madness. It acts similarly to the repetitive phrases the furies used while haunting Orestes in The Eumenides. The repetition of phrases generally amplifies the emotion of the speaker, but in this case, it takes away from her overall message. Repeating the phrase good night makes Ophelia sound uncertain and desperate. She is yearning for the present moment to be a typical interaction, but she knows that with all she is going through, that would be impossible.

FOOTNOTE 4 night, good night.
Page 108 - Repetition of this phrase further depicts Ophelia’s madness. It acts similarly to the repetitive phrases the furies used while haunting Orestes in The Eumenides. The repetition of phrases generally amplifies the emotion of the speaker, but in this case, it takes away from her overall message. Repeating the phrase good night makes Ophelia sound uncertain and desperate. She is yearning for the present moment to be a typical interaction, but she knows that with all she is going through, that would be impossible.

FOOTNOTE 4 your son
Page 108 - Claudius chooses not to describe Hamlet by name. It is an act of power and manipulation over Gertrude to dehumanize the two Hamlets. She is another female figure in this scene who has to deal with loss and has no way to impact her surrounding situation. Both Ophelia and Gertrude are forced to watch their worlds shift without a way to step in and affect the eventual outcome. 

FOOTNOTE 4 Divided from herself and her fair judgment
Page 108 - (With "keeps himself in clouds") Claudius asserts that both siblings are struggling because of their grief. His explanation further entrenches the gender expectations on them though, as he portrays neither sibling as sane, but for different reasons. He doesn’t trust Ophelia because she is no longer competent, while he doesn’t trust Laertes for his potential to seek revenge.

FOOTNOTE 4 keeps himself in clouds
Page 108 - (With "Divided from herself and her fair judgment") Claudius asserts that both siblings are struggling because of their grief. His explanation further entrenches the gender expectations on them though, as he portrays neither sibling as sane, but for different reasons. He doesn’t trust Ophelia because she is no longer competent, while he doesn’t trust Laertes for his potential to seek revenge.

FOOTNOTE 4 poor Ophelia
Page 108 - Contrasted with "Her brother... superfluous death". These differing descriptions depict Ophelia’s madness as something to pity while Laertes’s madness is something to be feared. This gap demonstrates how gender affects people’s expectation of each other. There is so little respect for Ophelia that the idea of her posing a threat is impossible. For both children, Claudius is ensuring that they are both labeled unstable, giving him more control over the situation.

FOOTNOTE 4 Her brother is in secret come from France
Page 108 - Contrasted with "poor Ophelia". These differing descriptions depict Ophelia’s madness as something to pity while Laertes’s madness is something to be feared. This gap demonstrates how gender affects people’s expectation of each other. There is so little respect for Ophelia that the idea of her posing a threat is impossible. For both children, Claudius is ensuring that they are both labeled unstable, giving him more control over the situation.

FOOTNOTE 5 That drop of blood that’s calm proclaims me bastard
Page 109 - This line parallels Hamlet’s final line of his soliloquy in the previous scene, “My thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth”. Both of these characters are exhibiting a masculine form of grief, resorting to revenge and violence as their method of coping. This type of processing loss is both incomplete and dangerous, a fact that gets shown by the excessive death at the end of the play. While most of this scene centers around Ophelia’s grief, this line gives the audience an understanding of how Laertes is dealing with his own struggle.

FOOTNOTE 6 Let come what comes
Page 110 - This statement by Laertes reminds me of the mentality that Achilles had following the loss of Patroclus in the Iliad. Both have abandoned their long term thinking in response to their desire for revenge, gravely endangering themselves in the process. In this moment, Laertes seals his fate in this tragedy as well. While Ophelia feels too powerless to do anything, Laertes is the opposite and is attempting to do too much in response to his father’s death. Both responses are tragic in their own right and play a role in these characters’ deaths.

FOOTNOTE 6 blackest devil
Page 110 - Christianity was well entrenched in English society at the time the play was written. A character appealing to any devil would be scandalous on a large scale, and marks the complete loss of composure from Laertes. His grief in this moment has clearly taken him over, replacing any rationality that was once there. By making him hellbent on revenge, Shakespeare shows how detrimental grief can be for a man who has no outlet other than revenge.

FOOTNOTE 7 certainty
Page 111 - Claudius understands that confusion amplifies grief, and appeals to Laertes’s lack of knowledge to manipulate him. Hamlet and Laertes both dealt with uncertainty when navigating the loss of their fathers, and Claudius understands the power he holds by providing them with information. This moment further develops viewers' understanding of the amplifying effect that uncertainty has on grief.

FOOTNOTE 7 bier
Page 111 - (With tear-) Ophelia’s rhyming in her song acts similarly to viewers/readers as the witches rhymes in Macbeth. It leaves an eerie tone on stage, sounding similar to simple nursery rhymes but with much darker subject matter. Both of these scenes show women on the verge of doing something dark by making their dialogue break from the structure that was standard in the play up to that point. The rhymes act as a signal to viewers that these characters are thinking differently than their peers, whether it is because they’re evil like the witches or despondent like Ophelia.

FOOTNOTE 7 tear-
Page 111 - (With bier) Ophelia’s rhyming in her song acts similarly to viewers/readers as the witches rhymes in Macbeth. It leaves an eerie tone on stage, sounding similar to simple nursery rhymes but with much darker subject matter. Both of these scenes show women on the verge of doing something dark by making their dialogue break from the structure that was standard in the play up to that point. The rhymes act as a signal to viewers that these characters are thinking differently than their peers, whether it is because they’re evil like the witches or despondent like Ophelia.

FOOTNOTE 8 There’s rosemary, that’s for remembrance. Pray
Page 112 - Ophelia’s second reference to flowers bookends her scene, as her final spoken line. She continues to embody femininity in grief by attempting to help others feel better with superficial aid when she isn’t doing okay herself. Her actions reflect the common female expectation to provide care to their loved ones at any cost. In this instance, the cost seems to be her own well being. She works to console her brother while no one is doing the same for her.

FOOTNOTE 8 you, love, remember. And there is pansies, that’s for
Page 112 - Ophelia’s second reference to flowers bookends her scene, as her final spoken line. She continues to embody femininity in grief by attempting to help others feel better with superficial aid when she isn’t doing okay herself. Her actions reflect the common female expectation to provide care to their loved ones at any cost. In this instance, the cost seems to be her own well being. She works to console her brother while no one is doing the same for her.

FOOTNOTE 8 thoughts.
Page 112 - Ophelia’s second reference to flowers bookends her scene, as her final spoken line. She continues to embody femininity in grief by attempting to help others feel better with superficial aid when she isn’t doing okay herself. Her actions reflect the common female expectation to provide care to their loved ones at any cost. In this instance, the cost seems to be her own well being. She works to console her brother while no one is doing the same for her.

FOOTNOTE 8 There’s fennel for you, and columbines.
Page 112 - Ophelia’s second reference to flowers bookends her scene, as her final spoken line. She continues to embody femininity in grief by attempting to help others feel better with superficial aid when she isn’t doing okay herself. Her actions reflect the common female expectation to provide care to their loved ones at any cost. In this instance, the cost seems to be her own well being. She works to console her brother while no one is doing the same for her.

FOOTNOTE 8 There’s rue for you, and here’s some for me. We may
Page 112 - Ophelia’s second reference to flowers bookends her scene, as her final spoken line. She continues to embody femininity in grief by attempting to help others feel better with superficial aid when she isn’t doing okay herself. Her actions reflect the common female expectation to provide care to their loved ones at any cost. In this instance, the cost seems to be her own well being. She works to console her brother while no one is doing the same for her.

FOOTNOTE 8 call it herb of grace o’ Sundays. You must wear your rue
Page 112 - Ophelia’s second reference to flowers bookends her scene, as her final spoken line. She continues to embody femininity in grief by attempting to help others feel better with superficial aid when she isn’t doing okay herself. Her actions reflect the common female expectation to provide care to their loved ones at any cost. In this instance, the cost seems to be her own well being. She works to console her brother while no one is doing the same for her.

FOOTNOTE 8 with a difference. There’s a daisy. I would give you
Page 112 - Ophelia’s second reference to flowers bookends her scene, as her final spoken line. She continues to embody femininity in grief by attempting to help others feel better with superficial aid when she isn’t doing okay herself. Her actions reflect the common female expectation to provide care to their loved ones at any cost. In this instance, the cost seems to be her own well being. She works to console her brother while no one is doing the same for her.

FOOTNOTE 8 some violets, but they withered all when my father
Page 112 - Ophelia’s second reference to flowers bookends her scene, as her final spoken line. She continues to embody femininity in grief by attempting to help others feel better with superficial aid when she isn’t doing okay herself. Her actions reflect the common female expectation to provide care to their loved ones at any cost. In this instance, the cost seems to be her own well being. She works to console her brother while no one is doing the same for her.

FOOTNOTE 8 died. They say a made a good end.
Page 112 - Ophelia’s second reference to flowers bookends her scene, as her final spoken line. She continues to embody femininity in grief by attempting to help others feel better with superficial aid when she isn’t doing okay herself. Her actions reflect the common female expectation to provide care to their loved ones at any cost. In this instance, the cost seems to be her own well being. She works to console her brother while no one is doing the same for her.

FOOTNOTE 8 prettiness
Page 112 - Ophelia’s final act is to make the situation around her pretty. She is unable to fix anything, and she promptly dies by suicide after this, capturing the constraints put on women of this time. She was never given an opportunity to seek revenge or even acceptance. When she experienced loss, all she could do was make it pretty. This depressing truth proved to be too much for Ophelia, and it was facilitated by the other characters who did not expect anything more from her as a woman.

FOOTNOTE 8 joy
Page 112 - Ophelia continues on the trend of superficially mending her broken spirit with her last song about joy. Instead of working through her grief, she tries to mask it. By trying to cover up her problems, she is unable to grapple with them, and they end up defeating her, driving her to suicide. Her final song is not about her dead father, as her focus pulls back from her specific situation, towards the plight of women in this period generally.

FOOTNOTE 9 due content
Page 113 - Claudius speaks of satisfying the urges that plague Laertes. This strengthens the overarching theme of the novel that fueling negative emotions like grief instead of moving past them leads to destruction. In trying to satisfy their desire for revenge, Hamlet and Laertes lose their lives. Laertes and Ophelia act as foils for each other in this scene, with both acting on the drastic ends of the spectrum of grief, and neither of them trying to process it naturally.



