Intro: Ari Stockwell
Images: Bricen Popko
Annotations: Charlie Slabaugh

	William Shakespeare’s Hamlet debuted at the turn of the seventeenth century, the first of four major tragedies published by Shakespeare, with Macbeth, Othello, and King Lear debuting in the years after Hamlet. Hamlet was created at a time of great concern surrounding the stability of government in England, as the reigning monarch Queen Elizabeth I had no children, refusing to name an heir. Without a clear line of succession, many in the country feared war would break out when the Queen eventually died. Hamlet’s setting and one of its key overarching struggles relate to the issue of power and control in monarchy, a not-so-hidden connection to the real world Shakespeare lived in.
	Throughout Hamlet, grief and madness take on central roles in controlling the characters’ goals and actions. With every character having such unique experiences and demonstrations of grief, attempting to decode these varying reactions becomes one of the audience’s main tasks. Many historians believe that the death of Shakespeare’s own son Hamnet only a few years before writing Hamlet inspired him to write the story, and is a reason for the emphasis on grief and tragedy in this play.
	The fifth scene of act IV of Hamlet is possibly the single scene in the entire story where this focus on grief, its effects, and the madness it causes becomes the most central. This is achieved by showing two very different forms of contrasting grief in the actions of Ophelia and Laertes, the two children of Polonius. Both forms of grief share similarities with the titular character of Hamlet and the grief he experiences throughout the entirety of the play. All three characters’ fathers have been murdered, with the most recent major event occurring when Hamlet stabbed Polonius, while in the events before the play, King Claudius poisoned the previous king: Hamlet’s father. These three characters are positioned to contrast each other and demonstrate a wide spectrum of grief, with Hamlet sitting in the middle.
	At this moment in the play, Hamlet is both a victim and perpetrator. Laertes and Hamlet are both driven for revenge by the death of their fathers, while King Claudius and Hamlet both show little genuine remorse for the murders they have committed. Each character is so desperate in their own way to achieve goals of revenge and power that they are willing to claw past anyone in their way. A key example of this is Claudius’ decision to send Hamlet off to be killed in England in a desperate attempt to protect his newly acquired throne, as Claudius suspects Hamlet is onto him. Hamlet does later escape this death in his own attempt to kill Claudius.
	With each character on their own path of violence, death and grief in this play are constant. Laertes and Ophelia each display their grief and own form of “madness” clearly in act IV scene 5. Ophelia’s grief is represented as graceful, as she sings songs and gives out flowers. Ophelia would go on to die a “graceful” yet sudden and tragic death, where her drowning and actions continue to be viewed as graceful madness rather than the descent into grief that she is experiencing. On the other hand, Laertes’ grief is represented as completely opposite; he seems to be acting logically, and is driven by a desire for decisive action and revenge. This quest for vengeance and answers makes Laertes appear to show the more rational and natural expression of grief. Even with this “rational” grief, Laertes is still in a susceptible emotional state, manifesting not only in his attempt to overthrow the king, but also in how easily Claudius is able to manipulate him and redirect his anger towards Hamlet, a shift that begins in this scene, foreshadowing the events that follow Hamlet’s surprising return to Denmark.
	This scene recontextualizes Hamlet’s grief as displayed earlier in the story, with Hamlet falling in between these two forms of “masculine” and “feminine” grief. Like Laertes, Hamlet is driven by violence, sometimes logic, and a desire to see his father’s death avenged. At the same time, like Ophelia, Hamlet displays what, to other characters and possibly the audience, is considered “madness”, and a lack of worry about his appearance in front of other characters. The spectrum of grief that is demonstrated in this scene implicitly places different value on these different forms of grief. Ophelia’s grief is entirely beautified  as graceful, lacking human emotional complexity, providing a comparison for Hamlet, and framing his madness as “non-masculine”, while entirely ignoring the reality of the form of grief that Ophelia experiences.
	At the end of the story, all forms of grief fail to achieve anything entirely successful. Ophelia drowns in a pond, further representing her as simply a graceful feminine character in an attempt to fit female grief into a simple and pretty box. Hamlet and Laertes do eventually get their wishes of seeing their fathers’ murders avenged, though both characters still are killed by the end of the story, with their revenge only opening the door for further violence. This continuous cycle of vengeance and death ends up leading to the state of Denmark falling under the control of Fortinbras (the Norwegian prince), with no character ending with power or their own life.
	The story of Hamlet as a whole, particularly act IV scene 5 highlights how grief is too easily judged. From the first moments of the play, Hamlet’s grief is viewed as too extensive and defying convention. This scene contextualizes Laertes’ grief as masculine, while at the same time turning him into a manipulated pawn for Claudius. Ophelia’s grief is judged as entirely madness, turning her personhood into a characterization for women as fragile, and unable to deal with complex emotions. Whether this characterization is seen only by the characters within the play, or by Shakespeare himself, is unclear. Yet, if Shakespeare’s Hamlet successfully achieves one thing, it puts a spotlight on the societal perceptions of grief that Shakespeare seemed to have been struggling with himself while creating it.
