Aside from the difficulties that stemmed from aligning our academic schedules, we maintained a strong mutual consensus while planning and executing a course of action for our project. This primarily stemmed from our collective, cordial dispositions, which allowed us to collaborate in a manner that ensured an equal distribution of work, while also holding one another accountable given the strict deadline and requirements for the editorial apparatus. For our project, most of the labor division came implicitly in the role assignment to complete each of the three sections. Though none of our ideas were made by a single individual, each potential framework for the assignment was thoroughly discussed to ensure that we would be able to handle the workload. Our first intersection of our work came in discussing what topics each of us may have felt strongly about, deciding on the scene in the beginning, and deciding what parts of the scene and surrounding context we felt important to narrow in on. By frequently checking in with each other on the overall direction of our individual focuses, while still ensuring we left each other room to make our own creative decisions, we managed to avoid having any major conflict throughout this process. One area that was difficult for our group was our schedule. The three of us all keep busy, so finding time for us to work together proved to be difficult. The most important part of navigating it was communication. Whenever one of us had to miss an arranged meeting, we were sure to do something extra before or after to ensure that our slice of the workload got finished. A key factor in avoiding conflict was not only checking in with each other before major decisions, but checking in with each other frequently, to ensure we were working on the whole process with similar ideas in mind. In this way, we did not end up working on conflicting arguments that we would then have to reconcile after the time had been put in. At the same time, the precise focus varies slightly across all three parts, which is a product of giving ourselves the freedom to make some of our own decisions as well. Having three members who were all willing to do their part and communicate when they needed help allowed us to push through the project with only minor hiccups. It was also extremely helpful that all members were entirely willing to help each other to make the process more seamless, including proofreading, modifying the text formatting so it could fit properly into website code, and providing feedback on image ideas. This allowed us to come out of this project not with three different adjacent projects, but one larger project that had each of our ideas incorporated throughout, even with the main division of labor between the three assigned parts.

Ari: I found this to be among the most effective group dynamics I have experienced in the last several years. Bricen and Charlie were both excellent at providing and receiving feedback, and allowing us all to work together effectively. Bricen and Charlie completed their sections of the assignment so thoroughly, with both of them succeeding despite coming at this project assigned unusual mediums for a typical academic assignment. I was really happy with how all of us stepped up to commit to the assignment and make it a seamless experience for each of us, avoiding the burden falling too hard on any individual person.

Bricen: On a personal note, this is the first group project that I have had at Columbia. Given the numerous horror stories I had heard about assigned groups, I was nervous about this assignment. However, it was a massive sigh of relief to have been able to work with both Ari and Charlie, as they not only contributed greatly to the project through their delegated roles, but also provided a great deal of positive feedback for my illustrations (I was showing extreme levels of self doubt in my artistic/creative abilities). 

Charlie: It is worth mentioning that Ari was able to go above and beyond his creative work as he was behind the website that acts as the medium for the project. He consulted Bricen and me about the details of the platform, but the technical aspects of it were his product. Ari and I were also lucky to have Bricen in our group to step up to the challenge of the illustrations. It was the most daunting of the parts for all three of us, and he did a much better job than either of us could have. Our mutual hard work and flexibility allowed our group to push through this project as smoothly as possible.
